Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by your return guest, Doctor Peter
Evanson. He's professor of philosophy and the host of
the weekly podcast, History of Philosophy Without any Gaps.
I will be leaving a link to our first.
Interview which was about the pre-Socratic philosophers in the
description down below. And today we're talking about his
book Heirs of Avicenna Philosophy in the Islamic East
12th, 13th Century. So, Dr. Adamson, welcome back to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much. Great to be back.
So since we're going to talk here about the
hairs of Avicenna and philosophy in the what they
call the Islamic East in the 12th and 13th
centuries, let me start by asking you first about
Avin himself. So who was Evin?
Right, OK, so Avicenna, who I these days actually
prefer to call Esina, so. When we first started
doing this project, that my colleagues and I who
put the books together, um, I was still kind
of in the habit of using the English name,
which is based on the Latin name Avicenna, but
nowadays I sort of gravitated towards calling him Ensina,
which is his real name, but whatever you call
him, he lived in Central Asia, so he's from
right on the border of modern day Afghanistan and
Uzbekistan. And he lived from the 10th into the
11th century, so he died in 1037 CE. And
he's the most important philosopher of the Islamic world.
uh, HE It's it's hard to kind of capture
his achievement in just a few sentences, but I'll
try. So one way to think about what happened
is that In around the 8th, 9th, early 10th
century, there was an effort to translate a massive
amount of Greek science and philosophy into Arabic. So
by the middle of the 10th century, you have
philosophers like, for example, Al Farabi, who's quite well
known, working in Iraq and Syria, who was able
to read, for example, pretty much all the same
Aristotle that we can read, but in Arabic translation,
and was also aware of other Greek sources like
Neoplatonism and so on. Um, EVEN knew something about
Plato, although his access to Plato would have been
a lot less good than his access to Aristotle.
And Faravi is typical of what happens in the
first couple of centuries after that translation movement, which
is that philosophers who are writing in Arabic, and
by the way, they might be Christians as well
as Muslims, so Faravi was a Muslim, but a
lot of these people are Christians who are doing
this in Arabic. They um are commenting on Aristotle,
they're writing treatises of their own independent treatises where
they reflect on the Greek heritage, maybe combine it
with ideas from Islam or Christianity, or even Judaism,
um, and so you have this kind of multi-religious
effort to come to grips with and build upon
Greek philosophical heritage. Then I Messina comes along. And
he does the same thing, in effect, except that
he does it much more innovatively, boldly, provocatively, and
also this kind of a long story, but he
weaves in a lot of ideas and problems from
the Islamic theological tradition. We might come back to
that later. So the result is that instead of
getting someone who's just kind of explaining Aristotle to
you or using Aristotle's ideas but kind of building
on them in a incremental way. He blows Greek
philosophy out of the water by and they sort
of puts it back the pieces back together into
a new system with his own terminology, his own
set of philosophical problems, his own, uh, even way
of arranging the, the curriculum of philosophical and scientific
studies, and he effectively replaces Aristotle as the philosopher
to whom everyone wants to respond. Um, NOW, The,
I mean this would get it more into the
actual book that we produced, but one thing that's
worth knowing is that out in the Islamic West,
so in Spain. You have figures like especially Avaroy
or Iru, who are still commenting on Aristotle. But
that's kind of an, I mean that's actually very
important historically because his commentaries on Aristotle were translated
translated into Latin and used a lot in Latin
scholasticism, but in the area that we're focusing on
the Islamic East, which is the main heartlands of
the Islamic world, it's really Messa who's of interest
to everybody.
Right. And uh, I mean, of course, it would
be, I guess, hard for you to probably even
summarize it, but what were Evin's main contributions to
philosophy? I mean just in general terms.
Right, OK. Well, so you're right, it's difficult, uh,
in part because he innovates in pretty much every
area that he discusses. Probably the only areas where
he's not really, um, Moving the conversation ahead massively
would be ethics and political philosophy, even now he
has interesting things to say, but he has interesting
things to say in the way that some of
his other contemporaries do, I would say. In, but
on every other area of philosophy, he's massively new,
um, even if he is always thinking about Aristotle
and Greek philosophy as well, as well as Islamic
Islamic theology or Kala. So his, he's always thinking
about these sources, but his new system is really
something new, um. Maybe the three things that would
be worth highlighting. First of all, logic. So in
logic, he has a new way of thinking about
how logic fits together, which um incorporates and significantly
expands the Aristotelian logic. So later works on logic
and as we might get on to talking about
they're really interested in logic in the period we're
looking at. They write textbooks on logic that are
clearly based on Avicenna's logic and not Aristotle's logic,
OK? And the of course this is logic so
the details are rather technical. I mean I can
go into them if you want, but they're not
easy to understand and explain, um, but that's 11
thing. Another thing is is theory of the soul.
So something that's very famous is that he has
this thought experiment, the flying man thought experiment. The
basic idea is, um, you're supposed to imagine that
God creates a human being floating in midair. And
this human being has no way of using their
senses at all, so he's blindfolded and there's no
noise, there's no smell or there's nothing he can
taste, right? And he's not touching anything because he's
floating in midair. Right. Mhm. So, uh, the point
of this just is that this is a person
who has no sensory input at all. Like a
sort of like a sensory deprivation tank, but even
more extreme, um, in, in part because he's never
had any sensory experiences before either, so he doesn't
have any memory of ever having touched anything or
smelled anything or seen anything. And so you might
think, well, a person like that would just kind
of be vacant or blank in their mind because
they haven't had any input, right? But if Messina
says no, this person would be aware of his
own existence, so he'd be sort of able to
think, oh, here I am, or something like that,
right? He'd be aware of his own thoughts maybe.
And he says that. This shows that the soul
is separate from the body, because he's unaware of
his body, but he's aware of his self, that
so that means his body and his self are
not identical. OK, that's the flying man thought experiment.
So that's a very famous thing that he does,
and it makes self-awareness a really crucial part of
later reflections on the nature of the soul and
the self. Um, THERE'S more to his theory of
soul than that, of course, but that's one of
the main things that he does there. And then
Even more radical and new and interesting is what
he does in metaphysics. And so, uh, again, this
is quite a long story, but effective what it
kind of boils down to is that he puts
the concept of existence at the center of his
metaphysics. So instead of thinking about God as the
cause of the motion of the universe, as Aristotle
had done, he thinks of God as the the
source of existence for everything. And he makes this
pivotal contrast between essence and existence, which we'll probably
get on to talking about more. The basic idea
here is just that what something is, won't tell
you whether it exists. So like a triangle, what
it is, will tell you that it has 3
sides and that its internal angles are equal to
180 degrees, but there's nothing about triangle that guarantees
that it exists, right? So existence turns out to
be this kind of extrinsic feature of things that
comes to them from the outside. And God gives
it to them, and he, he thinks through that
in lots of different ways and that gives him
a um a kind of way into metaphysics, that's
very different from Aristotle's metaphysics.
So with philosophy in the Islamic East and of
course we're going to get later on into some
more of the main topics that were explored by
Evin and his hairs in the Islamic East. But
uh would philosophy in the Islamic East compare in
any way to the scholastic tradition that we have
in Europe?
Very much so, yeah, in fact, something that um
I often say about this material that we've assembled
for the heirs of Avicenna books is that it's
like Latin scholasticism in many ways, except that it's
earlier, right, because Latin scholasticism kind of gets going
in the 13th century and keeps going actually all
the way up into the 17th century or even
longer, whereas this kind of post Avicennon highly detailed.
Engagements with seen as ideas, lots of distinctions, lots
of technical vocabulary, lots of arguments, so even things
like there will be a question and then 7
different arguments on one side of the question, and
12 arguments on the other side, just like in
a scholastic Latin treatise that would have been written
in the University of Paris in the 13th century,
you find all that in the 12th century in
Arabic. So, uh, and some of the things we'll
probably get on to discussing also have thematic parallels
in Latin scholastic philosophy. So these are very parallel
traditions. Um, THE reason for the parallels are complex,
so it has something to do with the fact
that in both contexts you have educational institutions that
Give rise to that kind of writing, so you
have like masters sitting with students, taking them through
a difficult text, making lots of distinctions, you know,
getting them to master the vocabulary and the concepts.
So that's one reason why there's so much um
parallel, so many parallels, but another reason is that
in both contexts and seen as the source, right?
So the Latin scholastics are reading Avicenna and my
guys are reading Eina and they're the same guy,
right? Yeah, so that's another reason why you have
so many parallels.
So to just provide a little bit more of
historical and intellectual context here in the, in the
book you mentioned that uh quote, in the middle
of the 11th century, the two predominant philosophical traditions
in the Islamic world were Falsaha and Kalam. You,
you've already mentioned Kalam earlier a little bit, but
what were these traditions about and why do they
matter to then contextualize the influence of Avis and
uh and how his philosophy relates to these traditions?
Right, OK. So Falsa, so F A L S
A F A, if you were writing it out
in English letters. Um, Fasofa is just an Arabic
version of the Greek word philosophia, right? So it's
the word philosophy, our word philosophy, but in Arabic,
and it was used to refer to Both philosophy
and what we would call science, so it could
include things like astronomy or physics, right? Um, SO
it's, it's that. But it very clearly indicates something
that comes from the Greeks, and you that's important
that the word is a Greek word, right? So
this would be like I said before Al Farabi
or earlier than healindi, or that there are some
other philosophers too which maybe would be confusing to
name them all, but there's a whole bunch of
philosophers who are doing this Greek inspired kind of
philosophy and itsina is one of them. So, something
that we see happening is that because he replaces
Aristotle as the main philosopher. In the later tradition,
they start using the word fasafa to refer to
sina. Right, so they know that Aristotle is also
kind of behind it, right? And they will talk
about Aristotle too occasionally, but if you don't, if
you see a reference to Phiafa or the philosophers.
Without further context in the later period in the
post Iveson period, it's always a reference either to
Evanina or to Mina and people who agree with
him, OK. So that's philosopher Kalam. It's a bit
more complicated. Sokalla is a word that we use
and was already used then for a theological tradition
that begins around the same time as the translation
movement actually, so it gets going in the 8th
9th century. And this is a tradition of people
using rational arguments to defend certain readings of the
Quran and Islamic theology generally, so they will argue
about things like the status of divine attributes, whether
or not humans have free will, um, what are
the conditions of moral responsibility. Um, WHAT are bodies
made of? Are they made of atoms? They usually
say yes. So one difference, like a real sign
of the difference between Fasaha and Kalam, is that
the Mutta Kalimun, the theo so people who do
kalam are called Mutta Kalimun, right? That's that's means
theologians, and they are they very strongly tend to
endorse atomism, so they think that created things are
these indivisible. Substances to which God associates various properties
like motion or rest, for example. Um, SO they
think that and the philosophers, the people who are
inspired by Greek philosophy like Aristotle, they deny that
and they reject atomism, which is true of Essa
as well. Um, SO what, so I mean traditionally
people have thought, well, there's theology and they're very
worried about the Koran and whatever, and there's the
philosophers who are reading Aristotle, but nowadays I think
the field, people in the field mostly agree that
a better way to think about it is that
you have these two traditions going along. In both
of them are philosophical discussions and positions being defended.
It's just that they're primarily responding on the one
hand to the Islamic revelation and they have their
hand to the Greek tradition, right? And then they,
they could see that the doctrines and arguments were
clashing and so one of the things that Messina
was trying to do was sort out the differences
between Kalam and Fasipfa.
Mhm. Right, and in the book, you also talk
a little bit about the formative period characterized by
a contest, a contest between Avin and Kalam. I
mean, what is this formative period about and how
did it play out?
Yeah, so, uh, I mean, I, I maybe I've
used the word form, the words formative period in
different ways in different contexts. So sometimes I use
that phrase to just mean the time up to
Avisana orsina, but here, I mean, we could also
think about The kind of formative period of post-Avisanian
philosophy, so what happens right after him, and here
the main figure is probably El Khazzali. Who died
in 1111. So again in Messina died 1037, so
less than a century later, and Vasali is a
major theologian who writes a lot, and one of
his most famous works is called The Incoherence of
the Philosophers, the Hafual philosoper. And that's a really
good example of something I just mentioned, which is
that the word philosophy or philosophers now means Essina
and Avicenan philosophy. It doesn't mean Aristotle, so when
he's attacking Essina, he's attacking, sorry, when he's attacking
the philosophers, he's attacking Essina, not Aristotle anymore. Uh,
SO what he does is to go through a
bunch of points in Messina's philosophy that he thinks
are wrong, be badly argued for by Messina, and
C, have a problematic relationship to Islam. So for
example, notoriously, Messina thinks that the universe is eternal.
So it it is generated by God. God makes
it exist, as I said before, but eternally, so
there's no first moment in time for the universe,
whereas traditionally in Kalam, people had said that the
world does begin in time, and Ghazali very strong
strongly defends that position. Um, THAT'S one example. He
also complains, for example, that have been seen a
can't account for miracles. Um, HE challenges him on
other points about how God relates to the universe
and so on. Um, SO sometimes people think of
Khazali as the sort of anti-hilosopher. But actually he's
more like a philosophically minded theologian who's attacking certain
ideas of Esina. So actually there's other ideas of
Esina that he quite likes, for example, Amessina's logic,
he thinks is sort of fine and and in
fact he's quite satirical and dismissive about people who
don't think logic is worthwhile, so he didn't see,
you know, these people are idiots that they don't
even do logic, right? So he's not by any
means a kind of across the board anti philosopher.
But he's a critical. Respondent to Messina, and there's
some other less famous people who do the same
thing, like Asha Hostani and uh Sharif Adina Masodi,
who also write kind of critical responses tossina around
the same time. So there's a whole kind of
wave of initial responses to Messina, where they are
criticizing him, but by the same token, there are
also people starting with Issina's own students. For example,
one of his main students is named Bachmanyar. And
they write defenses of and kind of summaries of
Esso's philosophy. Sometimes these are important because they present
Esso's philosophy so nice and clearly and in fairly
short space that people just respond to the students
instead of reading a Messina. Right, but it's certainly
like Avison in philosophy, what they're doing, so you
can see that already even in the first generation
or two after Esina, the battle lines are already
being drawn. There's kind of promossina and anti-sina voices,
and what's going to happen as we go forward
is that people will increasingly Sort of step back
from this debate, so they think, OK, there's the
Kalam tradition, which is at first been very critical
of Messina. There's this what we're now calling Fasaho,
which is just Avicen in philosophy, which is inspired
by Aristotle but is kind of different and reworked,
and they are passing judgment on that in some
way, and then that would be sort of the
next phase of development.
So how did you go about writing this book?
Because taking into account the huge corpus of works
from this period of time, which I wasn't really
aware at all before listening to your podcast and
reading your book, what methodology did you use?
So that's the first one. So there's gonna be
and that it's that big, right? So this is
800 something pages I guess. No, sorry, 700 pages,
but the second one, so this is uh this
is volume one, and it's on metaphysics and theology.
The second volume is on logic and epistemology, and
it's even longer. And the third one I hope
will be done in the next in within a
year or so and go to Preston, and that's
on physics and psychology. So how did we do
this because as you can see it was a
lot of work. So, um, I mean, part of
the answer is we got a lot of funding
from the German Research Council, the DFK, so Deutschevoch
Meschaft, um, who supported the project by a lot
and allowed or enabled me to hire several postdoctoral
fellows, and for this first book, the postdoc relevant
person was Fedor Bennovich. And for the second book,
it's him plus someone else named Dustin Klinger, and
then for the 3rd book, we have several people,
so we have Michael Noble, uh, we have Sarah
Vergy, and Andreas Lamar. So these were all these
postdocs who were working together with me. And their
job was to go through this mountain of texts
and find passages worth translating. So I mean, you
might think, OK, well we just translated everything and
that's why it's so long, but actually so to
give you some sense of like how much material
we're talking about, this is an extremely selective. So
extremely selective selected selection can I say that ass
selected choice of just individual passages from the works
of a couple of dozen philosophers, some of whom
each wrote numerous works. So, um, for example, one
of the main philosophers who we quote from a
lot who I, I guess we'll probably get on
to talking about Fahaddin Arazi. Fahaddin wrote like a
shelf or two worth of stuff about philosophy. So
if you translated everything that he wrote, it would
be many, it would be thousands of pages, thousands
of thousands of pages just for him, maybe not
thousands and thousands, but if you translated all his
philosophical works, I'm confident that it would be a
couple of 1000 pages at least just for one
guy, right? So obviously we couldn't translate everything. So
instead, what we did was we, we kind of
sat down and came up with a list of
what we thought would be the most interesting topics.
And each chapter in the book is has the
name of a philosophical topic like for example, proofs
for God's existence, right? And then the and so
in this case Fedor, the postdoctoral researcher who by
the way is now a lecturer at the University
of Edinburgh. Um, HE went through hundreds and hundreds
of pages of material on proofs of God's existence,
just kind of skimming them, really, because it's a
lot of the material they're responding to each other,
they're quoting each other so often you would read
a page and you think, OK, I know what
this is, so I can go on, right? And
what he did was to find um the most
sort of interesting philosophically interesting and original moves being
made within this debate. He did a draft translation
of the passages that he wanted to include, and
then I went through and um sort of adjusted
the translations, and then my other job was to
write an introduction for each chapter, and then he
adjusted my introduction, so we kind of worked on
each other's parts. Um, SOMETIMES we decided to take
passages out or put new passages in, but that's
basically what we did. So this, and this took
like, um, I mean the whole project took 6
years. So we have 6 years of research fellows
sitting in the office next to me, plowing through
all this Arabic um uh textual evidence. Sometimes, by
the way, we didn't have additions for the text,
so they only had scans of manuscripts, um. Sometimes
the works we were looking at are in Persian,
but mostly it's Arabic. For one author whose name
is Ba Hebraeus, we even have text in Syriac.
Which is another Semitic language, um. Which actually I
can't read, but my post so a couple of
my postdocs could read it. So, um, right, so
we, so after selecting all that, translating it, then
I wrote the introductions and that's really what the
book is. Something else we did by the way,
is that um I was able also with support
from the DFGO was able to fund people who
were typing up the original texts. So there's a
website, um, if, if you just look for heirs
of Avicenna, I think it's heirs of Avicenna.net. Um,
YOU have all of the original texts in Arabic
and Persian available as a free PDF. Oh, and
by the way, the books are free too cause
they're open access. So if you just go to
the bro website, you can download them for free.
So everything is free. Mhm.
Right. I mean, and how much of the original
material has been preserved,
preserved. Yeah. So you don't mean included in our
books actually no,
but actually preserved, yes.
Well, that's hard to say because I mean way
too much is the answer, I guess. I mean,
much much more than anyone could read, but I,
I think that um all of the major figures
wrote lost works, I would say. But for many
of these figures we have a lot of their
writings, and I mean one thing is we're now
getting to the 12th, 13th century, right? So we
actually have manuscripts that are that old. So it's
not like working on, so for example aindi, a
philosopher I wrote my one of my first books
about, he's 9th century, and his works are mostly
preserved only in a single manuscript, so we almost,
we almost didn't have aindi at all, right? Um,
AND there are other philosophers around that period where
we know actually in his case, we know that
he wrote many, many works that are not preserved,
whereas for someone like Fah Eddin, there are certainly
lost works, but we have massive amounts of text
for him. So I mean I don't, I, I
can't give you a statistic about how much is
lost because I don't think we we don't know
how long the works that aren't preserved are and
so on, but I mean as I say, we're
talking about. Shelves and shelves worth of um of
texts. Again, some of it's been edited in modern
printed editions and a lot of it hasn't.
Mhm. So, since, uh, in this conversation, we're going
to focus mostly on the first volume, the one
on metaphysics. I would like to ask you, how
did EIN, uh, approach metaphysics? I mean, what counted
as a subject matter of metaphysics and what did
not count as such for EIS,
right, that's actually the topic of the first chapter
in the book, right? So. Um, RIGHT, so that's
actually turns out to be a surprisingly difficult or
or contested issue, cause you might think, oh well,
metaphysics is just about whatever exists, right? That's what
we think it is. But it's more complicated than
that, cause you actually sort of have two choices.
Um, AND they stem from rival interpretations of Aristotle's
metaphysics. So one idea is that Aristotle's metaphysics is
just about being. So whatever is, right, and the
different ways of being, that would be the topic
of metaphysics. The other possibility is that Metaphysics is
in some sense a science which leads us to
God. And you might think that because the 12th
book of the metaphysics in Aristotle is about God,
and the last two books seem to be kind
of on different issues. They seem like not part
of the main project of the work. And so
a lot of people throughout history, Thomas Aquinas, for
example, have thought that the project of metaphysics as
a science and the metaphysics by Aristotle is to
begin with beings and substances around us in the
world. And kind of work our way up to
an understanding of God, OK. So, uh, and for
example Iro thinks something like this as well, so
avaro is the Spanish commentator I mentioned before, I,
it's again that's complicated. I wrote a paper about
it a few years ago, but we don't need
to go into that. So in Messina, um, apparently
at first thought that the metaphysics and the the
work by Aristotle and the science of metaphysics should
be about God. And then he wrote, uh, he,
or rather he read a very short little treatise
by Al Farabi about the metaphysics by Aristotle, which
said basically, don't be confused. God comes up, but
it's really about being. It's a study of being,
and that's what uh what in Messina thinks as
well. So he thinks that it's a study, he
wouldn't say being, he would say existence, so the
Arabic word here is whud. And it's the study,
so for him it's going to be the study
of the existence as such or or of existence
as such, and God comes into it because God
is the cause of existence for everything else, and
is himself necessarily existent, so he doesn't have a
cause, he he must exist by his very nature.
Um, THIS is interesting because then you could think
about, OK, well, does that mean that like what's
the relationship between theology and metaphysics? So in Aristotle
theology would be this treatment of God inside the
metaphysics, right? So you could think of theology as
kind of part of metaphysics, maybe it's the part
of metaphysics that studies God. Or you could think
of theology as some kind of parallel discipline, which
is devoted entirely to God and maybe even incorporate
some kind of information from revealed texts, right? So
the people who are doing Kalam, so what we
translate as theology, they have to think about the
relationship between what they're doing and metaphysics, and for
the most part they actually decide that what they
are doing is in fact metaphysics. And includes the
study of God in very much the same way
as it seen as metaphysics does.
Uh, BY the way, when it comes to the
philosophers from the Islamic East of this time period,
the 12th, 10th, 13th centuries, were all of them
religious or started from religious assumptions or not?
Yes, so they're not all Muslims, but they are
all Jews, Muslims or Christians. So that figure I
mentioned a few minutes ago by Hebraeus, who wrote
in Syriac, he's Christian. So he's the main Christian
that we're dealing with. One of the main philosophers,
um, from the 12th century, who we quote from
a lot, is named Abu Abu Barakat al-Baghdadi. So
that means he's from Baghdad, right? So that's why
he's called al-Baghdadi. Um, AND Abu Barakat was a
Jewish Muslim convert, so he was Jewish and then
converted to Islam towards the end of his life.
Um, BUT I guess apart from, oh, and then
there's also a later philosopher that we who we
use a lot in Kauna, who was also Jewish.
Um, BUT for the most part we're dealing with
Muslims. And of course there's no atheists, right, cause
there's no atheists anywhere. I mean, atheism is not
a thing until like 17th century France. So,
yeah. And I, I mean, this is a very
broad question. You can tackle it whichever way you
prefer, but what would you say are the issues
that best characterize the metaphysical philosophy of the Islamicist
in the 12th and 14th centuries? I mean, there
are many. Uh, TOPICS that you explore in the
book, like, for example, when you already mentioned the
distinction between essence and existence, but there's also the
non-existent, existent things and whether they are real or
not, the problem of universals or the features that
are or could be shared in. Common by many
things that platonic forms, individuation, free will and determinism.
I mean, which, which are perhaps the main topics
or what characterizes mostly the philosophy, the metaphysical philosophy
of this time period in the Islamic.
I mean, I think, so maybe there, there's actually,
I would almost say that you can sort the
topics of the chapters into two categories. So some
of them are really about. Preoccupations of Muslim theologians,
which they used and seen as philosophy to address.
So there you've got things like free will or
proofs of God's existence, right? So Avianna has a
proof of God's existence and they are very impressed
by it. They critique it, but they're using it,
right, and then they come up with other proofs.
So that's kind of um things that are appealing
to them because they are Mutta Kalemun because they
are theologians, most of them. Um, AND then there's
this other kind of issue, which is just a
kind of issue of pure metaphysics, and the same
people are interested in that as well, right? So
everyone's sort of doing some philosophy and some metaphysics,
or sorry, some everyone's doing some metaphysics and some
theology that we cover in this book, but some
of them are thinking of themselves more as theologians,
some of them are thinking of themselves as defenders
of Edensina, and some of them are thinking of
themselves as just kind of Independent thinkers who can
decide what they should say. So Abu Bakat would
be an example of that. Um, BUT since you
asked like what are the core areas of metaphysics,
I think the really key thing is this issue
about essence and existence. So again, the issue is
something like this, let's take me, so I'm a
human. So a lot is implied by my being
a human, right? So I have to be an
animal because humans are a kind of animal. I
must be rational in the sense of being capable
of reasoning, cause that's true of humans as such.
I have to be alive. Um, I have to
have a body. Right, uh, maybe even something like
I can't be as tall as a skyscraper, might
be something that is true of me just in
virtue of being a human. OK, so lots of
things are true of me just in virtue of
being a human, but not my existence. So my
existence seems to be something else. Right, and because
it's not explained by my being a human, in
Messino would say it has to have some other
explanation and the explanation would be my cause. So
whatever caused me to exist is what gave my
humanity this further feature which is existence, right? Now
if you think about it in that way, then
you're you're kind of imagining, well, I've kind of
got this essence floating around, and then a cause
sort of grabs it and sticks existence onto it.
Which is a very weird way to think about
it, right? Like what would, what would this essence
be humanity? If it doesn't exist even, right? And
that connects to a couple of issues we talk
about in the um book. One is the status
of the non-existent object, which had already been a
big debate in Kala before Messina came along. This
is one of the best illustrations of the fact
that they were really philosophers, as well as theologians.
They have this huge debate even before Messena about
the status of non-existent objects, and some of them
say, well, they're kind of real, they just don't
exist. Others say no, they're only like possibilities contained
within God's power. And different views about this, right?
Um, AND what effectively happens is that the post
Avicennon debate leads to two different positions. One is
a kind of realist position according to which in
me there's sort of two aspects, namely my essence
and my existence, and they've somehow been fused together,
right? So that would sort of like be the
people who thought that essences are real, whether or
not they exist, right? So you could say, well,
humanity was already real before I existed, and then
in it then it came to exist as well.
And so now in me an existing human, I
have my humanity and my existence as sort of
two principles that have been connected together by a
cause. And other people said, no, that's ridiculous. Um,
SO they think that this distinction between Existence and
existence, sorry, essence and existence is just mental or
conceptual. So they would say, well, we in our
minds can distinguish between my humanity and my existence,
but out in the world there's just me, right?
And I'm a human, right, but humans aren't made
of two different things, essence and existence. And they
have arguments back and forth. So for example, the
people who think that the distinction is conceptual will
first of all say that it doesn't make any
sense to think of an essence that has no
existence. Cause it would be nothing, right? So nonexistent
is nothing. Um, BUT another argument they give is
that If existence were added to essence, then the
existence itself would also need to exist. Right? So
there's the essence, the existence of the essence, but
what about if the existence is something real, then
it also exists. So there's the existence of the
existence and that further existence also exists. So it
has another existence and so you get a regress,
right? Like the existence of the existence of the
existence of my existence, right? And that's absurd, I
thought. Um, SO lots of technical arguments like this,
but that's one of the main arguments that they
have over and you know, in some ways they
are here arguing over the best way to interpret
Isina, like what did, what did he mean when
he contrasted essence to existence. Sometimes they think they
know whatssina thought, and then they disagree with him
or they agree with him, but actually it's not
that clear even what Evanina thought about this question.
So there's a kind of exegetical issue as well
as a philosophical issue.
Right, and what were some of the most disputed
questions in regards to God?
Right, OK, so one issue follows on immediately from
what I just said, which is um the status
of God's existence. So some people and Fahaddin Arazi
would be an unusual example of this. So this
is an unpopular opinion, but it's an important opinion
because it's his opinion and he's maybe the most
important figure of the 12th century. So he thinks
that existence is the same. Regardless of what exists.
So my existence is just like God's existence. It's
just that the thing that exists is better in
his case, right? And the difference between God and
me is that God's essence implies his existence, whereas
mine does not. So I need a cause to
exist, he doesn't, right? Right. But the existence as
such is just the same thing, right? It's the
same phenomenon. It's just maybe just say well for
him existence is just like being in the world.
That's what existence is. Other people say no, um,
because, uh, God relates so intimately to his existence
that his existence has to be divine in some
way, right? One way of thinking about this might
be that God's essence just is to exist, and
that's why he's a necessary existence. But if his
existence just is the same as him, right, or
the same as his essence, then obviously it's not
something that I could have, right, cause then my
existence would be God. It's obviously not true, right?
So, so there's a debate between people who think
that existence means the same thing for God and
creatures and people that's basically Faradin who thinks that.
And then there's other people who deny that and
say, no, no, no, God has a special kind
of exalted kind of existence. This is interesting, by
the way, because it's a good example of something
I mentioned earlier, namely that we get the same
debates playing out in Latin medieval philosophy. So in
late 13th century philosophy, so a whole century later.
This whole debate is recapitulated by Aquinas and some
other scholastics. So we have Dun SCOTUS, uh, occupying
the same position that Fahreddine was occupying, and we
have Aquinas and Henry of Ghent and some other
people defending their rival position that existence means something
different in the two cases. So that's one big
debate. Another big debate is whether he creates the
world necessarily or not, as we talked about before,
so that runs on from Casale. And a third
big debate is whether, well, not whether you can
prove that he exists, whether you can prove that
God exists, they all think you can. The question
is more how best to prove that God exists.
So for example, some of, and some of them
think those two issues go together, because some of
them think that the right way to prove God's
existence is to show that the universe cannot have
existed for an eternal period of time, right? So
it came into existence with some in some moments
in the past, like, you know. Exactly 7 million
years ago or something, and if that's true, then
it must have a the world must have a
cause, cause it began to exist that needs an
explanation, and that cause would be God, right? Whereas
inina and people who agree with him, think that
the universe is eternal, so they need some other
way of proving that God exists and insina has
a proof of God's existence which they discuss in
depth as well.
So at a certain point in the book, you
use the term para philosopher and ask whether the
philosophers from the Islamic in this time period were
philosophers or para philosophers. So what does that term
mean and how do you answer that question?
Yeah, yeah, I think we talked about this in
the introduction. So this is a term that was
proposed by Dmitrytas, who's one of the greatest living
scholars of Islamic philosophy. Um, AND he's done a
lot of work on it and seen himself among
other topics. So, um, Professor Gas thinks that This
whole tradition that we're looking at. I Perhaps very
complicated and intellectually sophisticated and I guess he would
probably even say it's very interesting, but he doesn't
really think that it's philosophy in the proper sense.
And the reason is that so many of them
are doing philosophy. In the context of some kind
of theological project. So as I said, um, they
are often people who would self-identify as Muta Kalimun.
Or even if they wouldn't, they are borrowing so
much from Kala that they are clearly like within
that tradition, OK? And they're obviously very convinced Muslims,
as we already said, right? And so what what
Guptas would say is, well, that's not really a
philosophy because philosophy would be something more like a
disinterested search for truth, right? So I, I guess
he would say that philosophers kind of start with
a blank piece of paper. And if, I mean,
probably they they could never just literally not have
any beliefs or commitments, but they would set them
all aside and just follow reason wherever it leads.
So for example, they would only believe in God
if you could prove God's existence, right? Mhm. So
what he would say is that these guys are
all what he calls para philosophers. In other words,
they're kind of pretending to do philosophy, but they're
not really doing philosophy because they're not really engaged
in a dispassionate. Objective search for truth, which is
what he thinks philosophy should be. OK, so that's
his idea. Um, I mean, so something that we
say in the introduction is, well, OK, but We're
about to give you like 700 pages of extremely
detailed, intricate philosophical argumentation, and I, I mean, I
think sometimes I think that he that uh Professor
Guptas and we are sort of talking about different
things, because I think what he's talking about is
something more like what was motivating them or what
did they think they were doing, right? So of
course they didn't think they were doing faafa, right,
cause they, they used the word faafa to mean
avian in philosophy. So I mean some of them
are defending him, but most of them are criticizing
him or using him to build systems of their
own. Um, SO I guess he would, he's really
interested in maybe what you would could call philosophy
as like a cultural project. And that's not their
project, he would say. He would say their project
is a theological religious project. I mean, so, so
a good way of bringing out the difference between
my way of thinking about this and his way
of thinking about it is that in the introduction.
We say, well, by his reasoning, Thomas Aquinas wasn't
a philosopher either, nor were any of the famous
Latin scholastic philosophers, and that seems silly, and his
response that he actually has a forthcoming paper in
which he says, exactly, that's true, they weren't philosophers
either. And I guess I kind of feel once
you've argued yourself into the position of saying that
Thomas Aquinas wasn't a philosopher. I, I sort of
feel like the the the argument is over actually.
I mean that just seems to me it's like
a nonstarter or something to say. So if you,
if you find yourself saying that, then you have
to work your way back and figure out where
the mistake was. I think you just sort of
can't say that that's ridiculous. But uh, you know,
I can see what he means. So I think
what he was, what he wants is philosophers who
are so unencumbered by religious concerns that there almost
haven't ever been any. So for example, I don't
think that by his standards, I don't think Descartes
was a philosopher. And if you think Descartes's not
a philosopher, you're really in trouble, I would say,
but I haven't asked him about that. I don't
know what he would say about Descartes.
Right, so, I mean, among all of the philosophers
that you cover in the book in the Islamic
East, what would this and in this particular time
period, what would you say were the most prominent
ones?
Yeah, OK. So there's a lot of philosophers who
we cover. So most of the chapters quote from
at least 15 people, and I think that we
have across the whole book we quote from several
dozen people. So it's quite a large cast of
characters and in fact, one of the problems or
one of the worries we had is that it
might be kind of hard to follow what's going
on. So, and in fact we say this in
the introduction like these books are not the books
that's going to tell you who these guys were
and what their projects were and and Dimitri Guptas
is right that that's not what we're doing. We're
not trying to present. The intellectual project of individual
people and what was motivating them or something. We're
following philosophical debates through. So I mean maybe you
could say that we're approaching it in a very
philosophical way and not a historical way, right? Um,
SO I think insofar as he, you know, that's
what he wants, that would indeed be a different
kind of study, uh, a book like, um, a
recent book by Frank Griffel. The formation of postclassical
philosophy, I think it's called. That's what he's doing.
So he's trying to reconstruct Fahreddin's project and um
like the difference between his different works and so
on. And there's other people who have done that
kind of work like Ayman Shehadeh, who's also worked
on Fahd Narazi, or Han Ana, for example. But
actually in some ways our our feeling was, well,
there's a lot of people thinking about that, like
how the works are constructed, why were they written,
when and where were they written? We wanted to
focus just on the kind of philosophical meat all
the arguments. So, um, like I said, there's a
lot of them and uh the people that we
sort of highlight as being the most important in
the 12th century are 3 guys, and I've already
mentioned two of them already. So Fahdina Razi. Who
I think is the the kind of hero of
the whole project. So he's quoted in every single
chapter, usually we quote from him more than anyone
else, and he's quoted not just in the metaphysics
volume, but in the logic and epistemology volume. He's
again quoted in every chapter prominently, and he'll be
prominent in every chapter in the physics and psychology
volume. So he's just, he's sort of like in
Messina, massively interesting all the time. So he's just
a brilliant, brilliant philosopher, um. OK, so there's him.
Um, AND he's, by the way, kind of hard
to classify, so people often think of him as
a kind of theologian. He was, he also wrote
a very important and very huge commentary on the
Quran. Which suggest that he was a theologian, but
he actually refers to Kalam sometimes as if it
was some other thing that he's not part of.
Right, so he sometimes he'll say like there's my,
my group, the people I follow who are a
certain group within Kalam, but he'll also say, well,
the Mute Kalimun say X, Y and Z, and
they're wrong, right? So his relationship both to Essina
and to Kalam is very independent minded. He's actually
a lot like Einna himself in the sense that
he's maybe trying to replace Eina the way that
Eminna replaced Aristotle. But he's not the only person
doing that. So a little bit earlier there's this
guy Abu Barakat al-Baghdadi I mentioned, Jewish Muslim convert,
like I said, um, whereas Fahaddin wrote books and
books and books, a huge amount of output from
Fahreddin. Abu Barakat really only has has this one
book, although it's quite fat. It's like that wide
in uh the Arabic edition, and it's called Kitababar,
which means the book of the carefully considered. Which
kind of tells you what he's doing, very similar
to what I just said about Fahaddin. He's Judging
which positions in the intellectual landscape are convincing and
which are not. That he's also very influential, he's
influential on Faredin among other people. His writing is
very difficult and and conceptually and linguistically difficult. Um,
ONE thing I sort of, uh, just anecdotally, when
I was going through the translations that my uh
colleagues had provided. I would always struggle to go
through Abu Barakat's like very difficult texts, and then
I would get to Fakhruddin and it would just
fly through. Fahreddin writes super super clear, beautiful, nice
clear Arabic, sort of like Aquinas in Latin actually,
um, I and sometimes I think the one reason
everyone wants to work on Fakhreddin now in my
field, and one reason people work on Aquinas so
much in Latin medieval philosophy is that they just
write very clear. And very like nicely demarcated arguments
and everything. OK. The third guy then would be
Suravay, also a very difficult author, very hard to
work through, and he's in some ways the most
complicated, um, because people have a very different idea
about him than what we found when we actually
read all of his books. So Um, this is
kind of a long story, but I'll try to
make it short, so. In later Iranian philosophy, and
especially in the work of 1/17 century philosopher from
Iran named Mullah Sarah. Savvay, this 12th century philosopher,
is kind of held up as a really significant
figure who initiates a whole new kind of philosophy,
which is called illuminationism, so it's called Iraki philosophy.
And it's thought to be kind of a a
new departure from previous philosophy that incorporates ideas of
from mysticism and maybe even older traditions like Persian
philosophy and Persian religious ideas, and this would be
this new illuminationist philosophy which considers God to be
a light who illuminates the world and our souls
are lights which descend from him and so on
and so forth, right? So, um, that's mostly based
on one of just one of his works, maybe
his most important work, which is called the Philosophy
of Illumination, Hikmat Aliak. So, OK, very interesting work,
but we, we did find when we read a
lot of his other works that they're very much
like other things that were being written at the
time, like by Fahaddin. And in that context, we,
so we're not saying that he's not innovative or
interesting, we do think he's very interesting and innovative,
but we kind of came away from it thinking
that he's a lot like Abu Barakat and Fahdin.
In other words, he's a very careful reader of
Insina, who is criticizing a lot of the philosophical
moves made in Insinna and wants to kind of
create his own philosophical system. And then in Hikmara,
he comes up with this illuminationist terminology to kind
of describe what he's doing. But fundamentally he he
fits pretty well into the 12th century scene, I
think. So that's the 12th century, and then 13th
century just briefly, I think two of the main
guys would be um first of all, Nasir Eddin
Atuzi. Tuzi is someone who um survived the Mongol
invasions and actually wound up working for the Mongols
and running an astronomical observatory in a place called
Maaga in modern day Iran. And he had a
whole circle of philosophers around him and scientists, so
he was an astronomer and um kind of all
around intellectual, and he was a defender of Ensina.
So what you often have is Fahaddin will attack
Essina and Tuzi will defend him. So in fact
they both wrote commentaries on the same work by
Essina, and Faddin's commentary is just a list of
criticisms, and Tuzi is a point by point refutation
of the criticisms, that's what he's doing in his
commentary. Someone else who's maybe worth mentioning from the
13th century is uh named Huaji. And he's not
so important in this volume, but he's the main
figure in the logic volume, or at least in
the logic parts of the next volume, because he's
the most innovative logician of the whole period, actually,
um, so he's really important for the history of
logic, but not so important for the history of
metaphysics.
OK, so, I mean, I have one or two
more broad questions to ask you before we wrap
up our conversation. So, is there, we are talking
here about the hairs of Evin. Is there also
a legacy to this Philosophers from the Islamic East
and from the 12th and 14th centuries. I mean,
if not on the global level, let's say like
many of the Western philosophers have nowadays, at least
in the Islamic world, or not.
Yeah, so actually one interesting question that that we
haven't really addressed yet is Hang on a second,
if there's thousands and thousands of pages of extremely
technical advanced philosophy in the 12th and 13th century,
why didn't people already kind of know about this,
right? And the answer is that they did. Especially
in the Islamic world, like scholars have been working
on this for decades, right? But it hadn't really
been integrated into uh history of philosophy in Western
languages until recently, so we weren't the first people
to do this. I mean, we were inspired by
the work of some of the people I mentioned
before likeuttas and Eichna and Shihade and Griffel, um.
But we, the reason we did this is we
just thought it was too hard for people to
access because masses and masses of text, no translations,
a lot of it's, as I said, not even
edited, so very, very hard to get at, um,
and that's why we not only translated the material
but also typed up the Arabic and Persian to
give people access to that. I think also even
people in the Islamic world or like native Arabic
speakers, they might not need our translations, but it
would be very useful for them to have the
the texts that we translated, right? Because it's very
hard to assemble all that material and find it.
OK. So the reason why this stuff hadn't been
considered very much in mainstream history of philosophy in
European languages is that it had no impact on
the Latin medieval tradition or the Renaissance, right? So
the Latin, there's there's an Arabic. Um, THERE'S a
translation movement of philosophical texts from Arabic into Latin,
and it happens around the end of the 12th
century, but in the west, so in like Sicily
and Spain, so they don't have these texts, they're
either too late or too far east at that
time. So someone like Fahdina Razi or Suravadi, despite
being very, very interesting, is not known to a
figure like Aquinas, but Aquinas does have vas and
Avicenna. Because they're included in the translation movement. So
you, you kind of have a, a kind of
um a point at which the two traditions have
something in common, and that would be really up
to the time of Essa and then they branch
apart. But the philosophers we're talking about here were
very well known in the Islamic world. So if
we go up to like, let's say the 16th,
17th century, so once you get into the time
of the Ottoman Empire, the Safavid Empire, the Mughal
Empire done in India, their works are known. Um,
Hunaji, or there's another logician named Najm Ad Deen
Akaibi who's who wrote a really influential logical textbook,
and his logic was still, so he's 13th century,
right? His logical textbook was still being used to
teach logic in Cairo in the early 20th century.
So only 100 years ago, and the logical tradition
that like ultimately goes back to Messina through people
like Huji was still being practiced in, for example,
India at the turn of the 20th century. So
actually it is a global phenomenon. It's just that
it's a different part of the globe. It's the
part that goes from basically uh West Africa and
North Africa, all the way over to Central Asia.
Right, that's what the influence of this um material
that we've been looking at. And if you said
Fahredina Razi to any Muslim intellectual of the 18th
century, so that's 500 years after Rai, right, um,
they would know who that was and they would
even probably have read him. I guess.
Yeah. So one last question then, by studying the
philosophy created by these Islamic thinkers and other thinkers
outside of the outside of Europe, actually, as you
do, for example, your podcast history of philosophy without
any gaps. How do you look at the Eurocentric
approach that dominates or tends to tends to dominate
philosophy worldwide? I mean, do you think it is
an impoverished approach?
I mean, yes, although I, I mean, I, I
think the, so in a sense you might say,
well, there's just obviously ridiculous to restrict the study
of philosophy to European philosophy, right? CAUSE there's all
this other philosophies of why would you do that?
And it's not just Islamic philosophy, right? So you've
got Chinese philosophy, you've got Indian philosophy, you've got
African philosophy, you've got Latin American philosophy, earlier than
that you've got Mesoamerican cultures which had philosophical material
um that are available. Um, YOU could even think
about, you know, indigenous philosophical ideas, Native Americans, indigenous
Australians, prehistoric Africa, um, that we can access through
ethnography and archaeology and so on. So we've covered
a lot of that, especially in the Africana series,
we covered that. And I mean, to some extent,
I think the answer to the question is just,
well, if it's there, then why wouldn't you study
it, just it's just all part of the history
of philosophy. Maybe there is some kind of feeling
that The philosophy from these other cultures, OK, maybe
it's philosophy, but maybe it's not as advanced or
interesting or something like that, as the philosophy from
that we have from like Leibniz and Descartes and
Kants. Right, or even Plato and Aristotle. So I
think maybe a lot of people who want to
cling to this Eurocentric approach, they might not, now
it's getting hard to say this out loud, right?
But they might still think in the back of
their mind or maybe even not consciously, they might
be thinking, OK, yes, I know that there was
Confucius and inin or whatever, but they're really good
philosophy has always been European, right? So one of
the things that you can do with a project
like this is just show that's not true. So
we are presenting philosophy here that's every bit as
advanced technical, sophisticated as, for example, Latin medieval philosophy,
right? And it's engaging with a traditional philosophy that
goes back through and seen it to Aristotle, so
it's part of the, it's even part of the
same story, right? It's just a part that kind
of diverged, right? And I think that's actually an
interesting thing to consider. So you also have extremely
sophisticated technical philosophy in classical India, for example. So
the Neaa logical school in India. IS doing things
that you could compare with what these guys are
doing in logic, right, sophisticated, technical, etc. um, BUT
it has nothing to do with Greek logic, right?
It's a completely independent phenomenon. And that's interesting too.
So the Islamic philosophy in general and this tradition
within it is in particular, these are interesting to
think about because they are kind of part of
global philosophy, but they're not unconnected to European philosophy
because they both stem from the original Greek tradition,
albeit via Messina, and they also to some extent
feed back into. European philosophy, not these guys, but
someone like I seen it was being read all
the time in the uh schools and universities of
13th and 14th century Europe.
Right. So, I mean, just before we go again,
the book is Hairs of Avicen Philosophy in the
Islamic 12 13th centuries. I'm leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview, but when
should people expect to uh have access to the
third volume on psychology and physics?
So the first, I think it looks like they're
gonna come out every 2 years, so. This metaphysics
one came out I guess in 2023. Logic and
epistemology came out in 2025 now, just now, and
so I, I think we're aiming for the next
one to come out in 2027. Let's hope it's
gonna be really long, so wish me luck.
Yeah, of course. Uh, SO apart from that and
your podcast which I've already mentioned in the introduction,
where else can people find you and your work
on the internet?
Oh, OK, well, um. So I work at Munich,
the LMU in Munich. So if you go to
my uh my the page of my chair, my
philosophy chair, you can see what we're up to
here. We have other research projects at the moment,
so now we're working on another group of philosophers
who worked earlier in the Islamic world, so actually
a bunch of Christian philosophers who were working on
Aristotle in Baghdad in the 10th century. So that's
the next big project we're doing here. Um, BUT
I think, uh, the main way to keep up
with what I'm doing is to just go to
my podcast website, which is www.hilosophy. WWW.HISTORYOPHILOSOPHY.NET, because I
also have a blog there where I talk about
what I'm up to.
Great. So, Doctor Adamson, thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show again.
It's been really fun to talk with you.
Likewise, thanks again.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor, Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Jonathan Labrant Ju Jasent and the
Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus
France David Sloan Wilson, asilla dearraujoro and Roach Diego
Londonorea. Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb
medicine, Gary Galman Samov Zallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti
Gabrielon Scorteseus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith
John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke
Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams,
the Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior,
Old Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander
Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John
Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson,
Mike Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik,
Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew
Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.